---
layout: post
title:  "Mermaid"
date:   2018-05-27 11:01 +0100
tags: master
---
It is time for graphs and pictures to better illustrate the archtitecture of various stuff I am bulding.  
So I settled on [mermaid](https://mermaidjs.github.io/), wich is a lightweight markdown-like script language for chart generation.  
In this post I am presenting you the way I set it up with Github Pages.  

<!--more-->

## What is mermaid?
Mermaid generates nice graphs out of markdown-like syntax on the client side. So this:  
``` html
<div class="mermaid">
graph TD;
    A-->B;
    A-->C;
    B-->D;
    C-->D;
</div>
```
generates this nice looking graph:  
<div class="mermaid">
graph TD;
    A-->B;
    A-->C;
    B-->D;
    C-->D;
</div>

Github Pages don't allow you to install additional plugins to Jekyll, so the mermaid integration has to be "native".  
I stumbled upon [this post by Kai Zhang](https://kkpattern.github.io/2015/05/15/Embed-Chart-in-Jekyll.html), that nudged me in the right direction.  
Combined with the current doc by [mermaid](https://mermaidjs.github.io/), I managed to set up a kind of decent install with my Jekyll instance.  

## Installation
Download the current mermaid release from the [Release Page](https://github.com/knsv/mermaid/releases) and extract the JS & CSS files from the `dist` folder.  
I would recommend using `mermaid.min.js` combined with one of three CSS-files[^1]. Copy these into the `assets` folder in your Jekyll instance.  
If you don't have an assets folder right now, simply create it parallel to your `_posts` folder.  

The next step is including these files in your templates.  
I chose to define the includes at the end of my `post.html` layout, as I will only use graphs in my posts.  
If you've followed along, you can now apped this to your `post.html`:

``` html
<script src="{{ "/assets/mermaid.min.js" | relative_url }}"></script>
<script>mermaid.initialize({startOnLoad:true});</script>
<link rel="stylesheet" href="{{ "/assets/mermaid.forest.css" | relative_url }}">
```

And that's it - mermaid should now be working. To add a diagram to your post, simply insert  
`<div class="mermaid"> DIAGRAM_STUFF </div>`  
at a location of your liking.


-------

[^1]: I'm using `mermaid.forest.css` in my blog, although you could use `mermaid.dark.css` or `mermaid.css` as well